our next talk is a really exciting
artist someone whose work I've been
really inspired by um in the over the
past couple of years Wendy Yan uh builds
research-based worlds about alternative
Sciences through game Engine film and
sculptures imagining a worlds of
esoteric progress she models alternative
scientific devices animates
technological creatures and makes videos
and games that inhabit other laws of
nature other geometries of History other
methods of knowing and other Virtues Of
epistem and other ways of seeing life uh
we're so excited to welcome uh
[Applause]
Wendy hello okay um thank you so much
Hannah Wade Barry for having me here
today uh thank you for giving an
emerging artist like me a chance to
share my thoughts and work so I'm I'm
really honored to present am such like
incredible lineup of Minds today and I
hope you enjoy what I'm about to
share uh my name is
Wendy I am an
artist I use 3D software to make
animations and games that simulate
alternative scientific
progress there are a lot of tropes in
science fiction art and I have a huge
problem with that
for some reason we're stuck with the
same kind of machines spaceships Mega
architectures and um robots for
decades um but I believe that fictions
of science can look very
differently and it's important to do
that my academic training is in history
of science it is essentially a way of
looking at history of ideas but grounded
in materials so instead of just looking
at how ideas changed um from writings by
individuals you look at the sociological
structures the knowledge economies the
cosmological Frameworks the tools that
enabled knowledge making at some point
in the
past and what I learned from my research
is that our past is filled with science
fictions Concepts that we hold at our
core like objectivity scientific method
science nature um they had their own
history and
evolution maybe just a few centuries ago
they actually looked very different to
people that um existed at the
time so I Tred to excavate viewpoints
from the past um that could potentially
liberate us from the epistemic
constraints we have
today that's why I try to use our um 3D
cell for to model alternative devices I
animate them and I try to imagine worlds
that might help us ask important
questions in a different
way before I go into my work um I want
to share this image that got stuck in my
head for several years it's a Victorian
board game called Wallace's game of
universal history uh you start from the
bottom left um it be uh the first metal
the first Circle depicts Adam and Eve
and then you kind of start a linear
progression towards the present moment
through a spiral course of Universal
history which is obviously mostly
Western European history combined with
Biblical
LS what's really interesting to me
especially is that at the center was a
railway train marching towards the
distance this is the second and last
edition of the game um and it was
published in
1840 it's as if history stopped there
with the arrival of a transformative
technology and in some way we can
probably do a similar thing if you just
substitute the center
with whatever is the newest technology
maybe AI I don't know um okay so let's
imagine being a kid in the mid-9th
century um playing this game you throw a
dice you move forward in time and you
land on somewhere you there's a booklet
for you to learn about what happened
there I want to kind of play a similar
game with you today but with my own
history um and I'll bring us to three or
3.5 moments in time and imagine
something
different so our first stop is is
prehistory these are photos I took a few
years ago in the Hier Arctic through an
artist and science res residency we were
hiking on the glacier um in luran swart
and at some point I realized that the
rocks that I was stepping on were not
just they didn't just have these random
patterns but they were actually life
formed from 10 million years ago and for
me this was the first time where I felt
the geological time scale bisui and I
wondered how to convey that through ART
around the same time I was doing
research on Mammoth
Resurrection scientists today are using
genetic engineering to bring mammoths
back to restore the tundra ecosystem to
combat climate
change and so I was doing re while I was
doing research on that I kind of
discovered that Mammoth is a very
interesting species it's very critically
um very critical um important culturally
in human history the captive our
imagination for as long as we have
existed um they were obviously there at
the beginning of our civilization but
they were also conceptually there when
scientists in the 19th century kind of
realized that actually mass extinctions
had happened in the past and that humans
might also go extinct one day um before
then people kind of just thought people
in the west kind of just thought that
Earth only had maybe 10,000 years of
History so what if a re Mammoth knows
everything but she does not care I
imagine a mammoth that is indifferent to
our
sufferings she hides in a coine she
collects objects related to her
ancestral memories she prepared a
glamorous room for herself to die
because elephants know when they're
about to die and she also made coins
that commemorate herself as her own
species synthetic Mammoth I will die
here and die
pretty perhaps she also collects trading
cards or Magic the Gathering cards that
depict her fictional
relatives there were a lot when I just
Googled
it I am Immortal because of my dreams
what kind of wisdom might come with her
wealth in time I wanted to imagine human
history from another Viewpoint the
perspective of a mammoth resurrected
from
prehistory When I
close apart from the animation film I
made I also painted blue glass made
installations and prints that occupied a
gallery space last year it was my show
which I titled a tiny Museum of Mammoth
Technologies I use the word Mammoth to
reconfigure our temporal relationship
with
Technologies this show was meant to be
viewed as a space of scientific objects
some people actually thought I heard
them talk to themselves they actually
thought it was a science show um I
wanted to feel like a a science from
another world that lives with a broader
temporal
Consciousness the idea is that you walk
into the space you wear a headlamp and
you get to experience how another world
sees nature
epistemically I wanted to speculate a
geological view of
Technology second stop is a uh quicker
one this is a museum um on the sensing
archaeological site that I went to last
summer it's an ongoing excavation
project and these artifacts all come
from at least 3,000 years ago if not
5,000 years
ago they all looked so intricate complex
and also alien sometimes like the image
on the far right this was when I kind of
came to the realization that we really
don't know how we started as
civilizations we have no idea how people
made these things um and what if I make
a myth about this
time what if at the beginning of human
civilizations there was no difference
between the Greek and the Chinese
traditions of
Technology you go for a deep sea
excavation and discover bronze objects
that look utterly different
I imagined that there might be a fusion
device of charting the cosmic movements
it is a combination of the Greek antia
mechanism which was used to calculate
the precise movements of the cosmic
bodies as a combination of that and the
Chinese Oracle bone which was used for
divination practices to predict humans
um correlation correspondence Between
Heaven and
humans so this device that you might
find in my alternative deep sea has two
very different philosophies of the
cosmos in one
device and if this was a starting point
of Technology what would we have
today maybe there might there might be
no East versus
West third stop
Enlightenment um we all know that during
the long 18th century European thinkers
formulated their values around knowledge
the Western identity the shape of
History the image of nature so on and so
forth forth and a lot of those
assumptions and conceptions um that was
that were formulated then are still kind
of what we operate around today but
there were also people that challenged
the dominant discourse and historian
Alexander statman called them Orphans of
it of the
Enlightenment some of the their
practices were relegated to the realm of
pseudo science so this is Mesmer
mesmerism a guy called Mesmer thought
that there was a magnetic force that
kind of flowed through for everything
and he used it to heal humans which uh
the practice got debunked a few just a
few years
later and then there were Jesuit
missionaries that went to China and they
kind of traveled between the continents
and communicated back and forth
translated a lot of text from Chinese to
French um and spe specifically there was
this guy called OT who ended up staying
in Imperial China he translated a lot of
the text and also published his own kind
of uh experiences in China into France
curiously in his manuscript he schemed a
secret society called the order of the
universal figure which would essentially
combine Chinese um knowledge practices
philosophies with u European scientific
discoveries at the time there was a
small group of people who speculated
that the mes the mesmerism the magnetic
force that French scientists discovered
at the time were actually just the T in
Chinese philosophy that people have
talked about for thousands of years we
know it's not true today but if it was
an orthodox Viewpoint in some
alternative Universe what kind of
Technology might we have
today I guess my question is what if we
had a different origin of modern science
perhaps a satellite of that world would
operate differently it would have
magnetometers for the flow of Yin and
Yang in the cosmos
it would have an advanced Baseline
imager for the vital energy flow um with
high accuracy and magnetic data it would
have Precision guided antenna for
transmitting life force back to Earth at
a specific Target with high precision
and an earth Meridian
mapper it would heal Earth reharmonizing
its in and young um in the outer space
okay stop 3.5 let's Fork another world
from Enlightenment if we continue along
the same metaphor or speculation of
taking tea literally as a force in the
law of
physics let's now focus on carbon
dioxide we could see Earth's body as
akin to human body and I want to combine
the sort of Chinese medical philosophy
with climate biotechnology today
so we treat we would treat carbon as a
SE capable of changing material States
re-energizing or de-energizing within
Earth's
circulation then the carbon Cycles would
be like Meridian channels in the Earth's
body subjected to a mode of correlative
thinking and the laws of in and
yang then you could heal Earth through
somatic
meditation there could be a breathing
exercise that that harmonizes Earth's
circulation of
carbon in this exercise you are a ball
of breath traversing the landscape of
Jade machines with your rhythmic
breathing there are solar panel leaves
that shoot out solar energy
balls there are bioreactor flowers made
of
and they secrete carbon dioxide balls
from the atmosphere like carbon
capture the flowers and leaves grow in
gardens and some Gardens are afflicted
dominated by in energy in this case or
young energy and the whole world is a
landscape of organic
machines so in this Garden which has too
much young energy the carbon dioxide
balls are just hiding under plants and
the bioreactor flowers are not working
they're kind of just dancing a little
bit and you need to use breathing to put
them into a state of
balance so this is a game that I've been
making with my friend e who's not here
today so here's a shout out to him um he
does the level design and interaction
programming and I make the art um we've
been working remotely on this game for
half a
year it's inspired by a DA's diagram
called chart of the inner landscape
which portrays a human body as a
landscape collage and practitioners
visualize this in their body during
meditation I'm pretty sure you can still
see it in Beijing today it's inside a
temple so we turn it into a game world
and this is my very quick word drawing
of the game
World um I made my own 3D models my
collaborator developed elaborate
gameplay mechanics just so that we can
immerse the players in an organic
practice of
technology and this what has to exist as
a game because I want people to feel
immersed in a different kind of agency
um which is unique to
game let's do constructive imagination
of what's possible with technology and
practice as an organic view of
Technology through
gameplay in the first level there are
three
Gardens inside each Garden is a unique
puzzle of
breathing and sometimes poths are hidden
and only unlock when you breathe
steadily in real life like the outline
that you see on the top of the image so
when you use a Xbox controller and you
press and release the right trigger to
kind of simulate the exhalation and
inhalation of breathing
your breathing activity would mediate
the dynamic in the landscape if you
don't uh press and release the right
trigger you're not breathing then
nothing happens if you breathe somewhere
regularly then the machine plants kind
of start generating energy so that you
can actually go ahead and S puzzles um
if you breathe too much it's
hyperventilation and there are
consequences so this is a gameplay
recording um so as you can see here when
you exhale and inhale the the the leaves
kind of come towards you or turn away
from you given how much given if you're
like exhaling or inhaling and that's how
you move around in the
field this game is still in development
we've completed the first level which is
about 40 minutes of game play um it
stand on it it stands on its own as a
puzzle game and we love to start showing
it in physical spaces to invite people
into the
world so here there's a monster that
guides the central tower the monster is
inspired by mining drills like the front
of like mining machines but its head has
three of those to kind of symbolize the
anthropogenic greed of overe
extraction essentially at the middle of
each Garden there's a tower that has
Machinery inside and it goes deep down
into the ocean so you don't see the full
kind of operation Machinery of the world
you just see the surface level of it
and in order to get to the central tower
you have to step on the back of the
monster in the final exercise within
this Garden would be like to breathe in
and out to power this um physical
thing and at the top of level one there
is a jade machine on the pelvis mountain
in this world hopefully people can feel
that technology nature and whatever you
are as a player inside kind of coexists
in a more harmonious way
so that was level one which was about
solving physical puzzles everything is
literal intuitive you push and pull with
exhalation and inhalation um and level
two is about ascending through the
spinal stream um because and this this
is where you upgrade your Elixir um
which is carbon neutral fuel with spirit
and by spirit I don't mean God I don't
mean philosophy with a capital P I mean
intention and
awareness and finally I end of the game
or at the end of the diagram also
there's a line of poem called a grain of
millet contains the world um the idea is
that your body contains the secret of
the whole
Cosmos vision and knowledge are
intimately
intertwined what we're capable of seeing
influences the type of knowledge that we
get to make the way that we depict
reflects our onology and worldview and
what we are capable of imagining also
influences where and how we look
epistemically
this is photo 51 a very important image
in history of science because it was the
first time we could actually prove that
um DNA had a double helix
structure I kind of used it as an one
half of the inspiration for the central
icon in the game this is where you see
how of your player is breathing um in
and
out Science and Technology are not
homogeneous by Nature we globalize and
standardized science in the last two
centuries but it's also only been two
centuries it doesn't mean that it's
impossible feudal or culturally
invaluable to imagine how the course of
scientific progress could have unfolded
otherwise so I try to use 3D software to
spawn my own small worlds that get us to
maybe imagine Science and Technology
differently because at the end of the
day it is not about specific scientific
practices but how we view ourselves in
relation to the rest of the world it
goes back to us like what is the self
that's trying to know how is the self
responding to the sensory information
that goes into their system and how is
the self existing with other living
things our imagination of time does not
have to be straight
lines and the practice of forking
alternative past in which a radically
different present is implied is an
important pursuit of epistemic
Liberation I hope that these impossible
fictions I shared today can release us
from the tight grip of the modern
selfhood I hope you feel a little bit
more lightness thank
you thanks thank you so much Wendy um
the game is absolutely stunning the
level of detail and intricacy and
Novelty in terms of gameplay mechanics
is really inspiring um you know you
mentioned that working with game engines
and using Game mechanics was something
that allowed you to give uh a viewer an
audience member more agency since now
that you're in the process of building
the game and testing it and play testing
it what how has that changed your
perspective or how has it affected your
thinking around the kind of experience
that you want to impart to a
viewer yeah I've been sort of testing
intuition with people that have play
tested the game so so far like there's a
puzzle or there's like a mechanic where
I just tell people like okay just
breathe like try to simulate how you
normally try to take a deep breath and
see if if it works you know without
giving them the numbers or having any
visual indication of um how much they're
pressing releasing the button and then
people can do it and then it's just like
a very cool experience to see that oh
yeah actually maybe I can try to reduce
the amount of visual cues inside the
game and try to make it as uh intuitive
as as possible and perhaps that could be
even more immersive in the sense of
conveying this other kind of philosophy
of another world and they have their
different uh worldviews and their
different logic um so that has been a
big surprise how do you I mean this is
something I ask a lot of game designers
uh or artists working with games because
when you create a video game and
something that somebody has to perform
action with you can't you can guide them
in a in a certain direction but you
can't necessarily control their
experience to the most minute degree how
do you like you as the Creator while
you're giving agency to your audience
how do you reconcile with the agency as
an artist that you have to give up in
that
scenario wait give up on what like how
do you you as an artist you know give up
the agency that you have in terms of
like you have to let go and allow the
audience member to kind of find their
own path yeah um I've definitely been
learning from my collaborator that there
are a lot of very subtle things we can
do
that would just somehow make people go a
certain way and so I think with his help
it has been a very interesting process
of seeing that oh we can still actually
design quite a bit without necessarily
making it feel forced so we're trying to
do that but I think for me I don't
really feel like it's a problem if
people don't do things the way I want
them to because the logic is embedded in
the game itself and no matter how much
they sort of succeed or fail fail within
the world they're still getting to kind
of get a taste of how that world feels
like and I think that's important in
itself absolutely thank you so much
Wendy appreciate it thank you so much